# Brick Veneer

So what is it? Why is it not just brick?

Modern brick houses use brick veneers instead of solid brick construction. What’s the difference? Brick veneer provides no structural support for the house. All the structural support is with the wood framing, just as it would be for a house that has vinyl or wood siding. Veneer brick is usually more fragile and thinner, or not as deep as traditional brick construction would be. Since the veneer brick is really no more than a siding material, strength is not a primary design characteristic. Traditional brick needs to be thicker to provide more structural support, as it used to actually support for the structure of the house. 

Behind the brick veneer there is a gap to allow for ventilation and water drainage. The bottom row of the brick will have slots in between some of the brick on the base row. These are called weep holes and they allow water to escape from behind the brick. It very important for these to stay clear to insure proper drainage. I’ve seen homeowners fill them caulk thinking they are joints the builder forgot to put mortar. I’ve seen them filled in with from mortar from the brick installation. Also it it very important important to have proper flashing and vapor barrier on the framed wall of the house, as this is the part that truly keeps natural out. The brick veneer purpose is to protect the vapor barrier from damage, same as if siding was used. 

It’s hard to imagine that brick is porous, but it is indeed. Think of the walls of a cave, constantly seeping out and dripping water. The same thing happens with the bricks on a wall of a house. If the water has nowhere to go, it will accumulate and eventually find a way out. That way out will likely be into the house causing lots of damage including unseen damage like rot or organic growth.